Do you ever feel disadvantaged?
Do you feel that perhaps because of unfavorable circumstances over which you have no control,
you just don't have a fair chance in life?
Maybe you feel that in the race of life, others seem to be able to run freely,
but you have to run with a crutch.
In this program, we're going to talk about a very endearing aspect of Jehovah's personality.
His loving care for the disadvantaged.
We'll delve into his feelings for such ones, his respect for them,
and his long history of caring for them.
We'll also consider how Jehovah's care of the lowly ones draws us closer to him
and how it can reassure you if you face disadvantages in your life.
To begin with, who are the disadvantaged?
When we speak of disadvantaged ones in this discussion,
we're not talking about the inadequacies of the person,
but rather of the unfortunate circumstances in life that one must contend with.
Often a person inherits the situation through no fault of his own.
Among such ones, the Bible specifically mentions widows, orphans, and foreign residents.
Notice this at Deuteronomy 24-17.
You must not pervert the judgment of the foreign resident or of the fatherless child,
and you must not seize the garment of a widow as security for a loan.
The watchtower said,
the law specifically protected those who could not protect themselves,
such as orphans, widows, and foreign residents.
Psalm 1014 refers to such ones as unfortunate victims.
The Bible also uses the term lowly ones,
not because they're less important, but because of their circumstances.
Our next main question is, how does Jehovah feel about such ones?
We really see a beautiful aspect of Jehovah's personality here,
his compassion and empathy in action.
Since a widow doesn't have a husband to care for her,
and orphan doesn't have parents to provide for and protect him,
and a foreigner has no advocate, Jehovah steps in,
and fills those roles personally.
Notice this in the wording of Psalm 68 in verse 5,
a father of the fatherless,
and a protector of widows is God in his holy dwelling.
Jehovah himself assumes the responsibility left vacated.
He becomes the father.
He becomes the protector.
As their protector, note how he views their care at Exodus 22,
22 through 24.
You must not afflict any widow or fatherless child.
If you afflict him at all so that he cries out to me,
I will unfailingly hear his outcry,
and my anger will blaze, and I will kill you with the sword,
and your wives will become widows, and your children will be fatherless.
Regarding this verse, the watchtower said,
Notice that Jehovah did not leave it up to the human judges in Israel
to enforce this law.
God himself would execute judgment upon anyone who took advantage
of a defenseless child.
This is how personally Jehovah takes the care of the lowly disadvantaged ones.
They become his responsibility.
They come under his protection.
Jehovah personally makes up for any disadvantage they may have.
The fact that Jehovah takes personal responsibility for such ones
is further seen in Proverbs 19, 17.
The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah,
and he will repay him for what he does.
Let's walk through the process that this verse describes.
First, we assist the lowly, or we show favor to them in some way.
We help them in a practical way.
We encourage them.
We make sure they get justice, or care for something else they're in need of.
Well, as discussed, Jehovah has assumed the responsibility to care for these disadvantaged ones.
So when we step in and assist, Jehovah views this as if we are giving to him,
assisting him with his responsibility.
But Jehovah doesn't view it as a gift or payment, but as a loan.
What's the difference between a gift and a loan?
A loan must be repaid.
Imagine when we assist the disadvantaged,
Jehovah actually views himself as indebted to us lowly humans.
Jehovah will repay that debt with favor and blessings.
Without a doubt, Jehovah feels strongly about the care of disadvantaged ones.
Let's consider this a little further.
Because of Jehovah's love and compassion for the disadvantaged,
he enacted laws to protect them in Israel.
In these laws, we see the depth of Jehovah's understanding
and his tender care and protection of such ones.
Consider just two examples.
First, let's look at his law regarding a security for a loan.
We find this at Exodus 22, 26, and 27.
If you seize the garment of your fellow man as security for a loan,
you are to return it to him by sunset.
For it is his only covering, his clothing to cover his body,
in what will he lie down to sleep.
When he cries out to me, I will certainly hear, for I am compassionate.
There's compassion in this law for any poor Israelite
who might find himself in this situation.
However, note the additional stipulation made in the case of widows
as stated at Deuteronomy 24-17.
You must not pervert the judgment of the foreign resident
or of the fatherless child,
and you must not seize the garment of a widow as security for a loan.
In the widow's case, no Israelite was to take her garment as security at all.
Jehovah evidently wanted to eliminate any chance
that she be left overnight without her garment to keep her war.
Isn't that beautiful?
Don't we see Jehovah's special love and care for disadvantaged ones
and a law like this?
Here's a second example of a law made to help the lowly ones.
In this case, it was related to the sacrifices the Israelites
were to make to Jehovah for the forgiveness of their sins.
We know the importance of blood in regard to sacrifices to atone ones from sin.
Leviticus 1711 tells us that it is the blood that makes atonement.
However, note the provision made for the very poor in Israel
found at Leviticus 5-11.
Now if he cannot afford two turtle doves or two young pigeons,
he must bring as his offering for his sin a tenth of an epha of fine flour
for sin offering.
Regarding this, the watchtower said,
for the very poor, Jehovah chose to make an exception
and allow a sin offering without blood.
In Israel, poverty denied no one the blessing of atonement
or the privilege of making peace with God.
The watchtower continued,
does that mean that the flour offerings of the poor were worthless?
No.
Jehovah surely valued the humble willing spirit behind such offerings.
Furthermore, the sins of the entire nation, including the poor,
were covered by the blood of the animals offered to God on the annual day of atonement.
In this, we see Jehovah's reasonableness, his compassion,
and his love for the disadvantaged.
No one was left out,
and they received the same refreshment from their sacrifice as any other Israelite.
So far in our discussion, we've highlighted that Jehovah takes personal responsibility
for the care of disadvantaged ones.
He steps in and fills the vacated role.
And when we assist such ones, he views it as lending to him.
Further, we see his love and compassion in the laws he enacted to protect such ones in Israel.
But here's an important question.
When you think about the special place Jehovah has in his heart for disadvantaged ones,
how does that make you feel about him?
Doesn't it draw you closer to Jehovah?
We can't help but love him for it.
Jehovah's love and care for the disadvantaged is in such stark contrast
to the way such ones are often treated in the world.
Sadly, the world often steps on the disadvantaged,
taking more advantage of them because they can.
Further, who does the world praise and promote?
Isn't it typically the beautiful, the rich,
the talented, the funny, the charismatic?
Whereas the common person, even more so, the disadvantaged often doesn't receive such favor.
By contrast, Jehovah is on the lookout for the lowly ones.
This brings us to our next question.
How is this reassuring for those of us who are disadvantaged in one way or another?
At the outset, we ask that question, do you feel disadvantaged?
What are your circumstances?
Maybe because of your situation, you relate to the widow,
the orphan, or the foreign resident in Israel.
And while the mosaic law specifically mentioned those three,
we could broaden those groups today, couldn't we?
For example, we certainly have widows in our midst today
and our hearts truly go out to these dear ones.
But couldn't we also include in this group wives who are neglected or abused by their husbands,
verbally, emotionally, or physically?
Such ones don't have the normal protection expected of a husband.
Couldn't we also include single parents, either because of the death of a mate
or because of divorce or abandonment?
Along with orphans, couldn't we include children of single parents,
children of parents addicted to alcohol or drugs,
or children of parents suffering from severe depression or other debilitating mental illness?
In these cases, the children may not be getting the normal care and training that's due to them.
And what about foreigners?
These are disadvantaged because they have no advocate, no legal recourse for protection.
Couldn't we also include in this group ones who are minorities in the land where they live
and so are often discriminated against?
Really, we could include any who do not have the normal protection do them
or just don't have the same opportunities as others,
any who feel disadvantaged, such as the impoverished, the disabled,
those with a lack of education or training.
Those who because of unfavorable circumstances in their youth didn't get a fair chance
and the list could go on.
What makes you feel disadvantaged?
Well, all of Jehovah's loving tender care for the lowly ones who we discussed earlier applies to you.
Jehovah feels just as strongly about your situation as he did for the widow and orphan and foreign resident
in Israel.
He takes personal responsibility for your care and protection.
Note what the Bible says about him at Isaiah 57-15.
For this is what the high and lofty one says, who lives forever and whose name is holy.
I reside in the high and holy place, but also with those crushed and lowly in spirit
to revive the spirit of the lowly and to revive the heart of those being crushed.
Here, Jehovah says that he resides with the lowly ones.
That means that he doesn't just see your situation from afar.
He doesn't just come and go quickly.
Note this gives the sense that he sits down, he gets comfortable and stays with you.
And for what purpose does he remain close to you?
To revive your spirit and your heart, he has open concern for your welfare.
Have you personally experienced Jehovah's loving help in your situation?
Of course, living during the time that we do, we know that we can't expect Jehovah to shield us from every hardship that comes our way.
But have you seen him help you endure?
Have you experienced him provide for you?
Have you seen him answer a prayer at just the right time?
Have you come across a scripture or article from the publications that gave you just what you needed when you needed it?
Have you seen Jehovah's care through a thoughtful word or timely practical help from one of your brothers or sisters in the congregation?
That is Jehovah residing with you.
You are not alone.
Jehovah is reviving your heart.
He has assumed responsibility for your care.
He takes it personally.
You are important to him.
And we just love him for it, don't we?
Well, there's something else that Jehovah does to help the disadvantaged.
He gives you hope.
You will not be downtrodden forever.
Jehovah's care for the disadvantaged will be fully expressed in a new world when all this advantages will be removed.
Psalm 145 verse 16 says,
You open your hand and satisfy the desire of every living thing.
Not just the prominent, not just the favored, but Jehovah will satisfy the desire of every living thing.
That includes you.
The watchtower said,
The fulfillment of Jehovah's promises will be so impressive that the difficulties and trials of the present time will pale into insignificance.
In the coming paradise, the blessings from Jehovah will surpass our imagination.
And we will certainly experience unprecedented happiness.
Nothing will be missing in paradise.
Nothing will be unfair.
Every person will have every advantage.
Praise be Jehovah God, the protector of the disadvantaged ones.
We hope that this discussion has reassured you.
Reminded you of Jehovah's tender care.
And given you confidence that Jehovah will always be there for you.
He will always protect you whatever your disadvantage may be.
And in the end, Jehovah has reserved a beautiful future for all those seeking refuge in Him.